In this video we're going to figure out how we can take some string that the user enters like my secret
message and turn it into a seemingly random string of characters like what you see over here so we're
going to use a encryption methodology called base64 encoding.
In this video I want to tell you a little bit more about how base64 encoding works.
You don't really need to know the behind the scenes stuff to understand this because at the end of the
day we're going to use a function built into javascript to do this conversion process for us.
Nonetheless I thought you might be kind of curious about how all this stuff actually works.
So to understand how this encoding works I want to imagine or walk through the process really of how
we would encode the characters s e c like so.
So like really short for secret message.
But I want to just think about the first three characters alone.
That's the goal.
Now is a little bit of backstory.
I you understand two important concepts here.
There are two sets of character codes that we're going to use to encrypt that string.
The first one you need to be aware of is the ASCII character code set to the ASCII character code set.
Essentially is saying that the characters lowercase a ze capital A3 Zi 0 9 and a couple of other special
characters can be represented with the decimal value from 0 to 127.
So let me show you a chart that can help you understand what that's really saying.
This right here is an ASCII at character table.
So it's essentially telling us that all these different characters that you see in red have a number
representation we can use to refer to each specific character for example the letter S which we said
we want to encode has an ASCII representation of 1 1 5 lowercase e is 1 to 1 and c is ninety nine likewise
there is also a set of character codes referred to as the base64 character codes.
So this is essentially saying something similar but it's for very much for your characters.
So the characters lowercase A3 Zi capital A3 and 0 through 9 can be represented with a decimal value
as well.
So the those character codes are essentially from this table right here.
So it's more or less saying that the letter S has a character code of 44 capital a zero and so on so
when we talk about and coding a string using a base64 encoding we're really talking about is essentially
taking the ASCII character code representation of a string like the letters S.E.C. getting the numbers
that represent each character and somehow converting them into the base64 standard and then taking all
those numbers and returning them back to their original character forms like the letter A B C D and
so on.
The thing that makes this process all that tricky is the fact that ASCII character codes can span from
0 to 127 but base64 character codes can span from zero to sixty three.
So in order to make these two conversions kind of work together we end up using a little bit of a trick.
Let me walk you through exactly what that trick is so we're going to understand this conversion process
step by step that we first start off with the letters S E and C again that is the character sequence
that we're going to imagine how it gets translated do we start off with the ASCII character representation
and then we convert each of those into their respective character codes.
So we get 1 1 5 1 2 1 and ninety nine.
We then take those numbers and convert them to their eight digit binary representation.
So these are like the ones and zeros that we talk about when we imagine the very base or core level
of computer programming.
So each number it gets converted into a binary representation.
You can double check these numbers by just going online and doing a Google search for decimal to binary.
So for example if I wanted to convert 1 1 5 I could pull up a calculator like the one you see right
here put in 1 1 5 and I get out 0 1 1 1 0 0 1 1
now the thing to keep in mind here or noticed is that each of these numbers get converted into an eight
digit binary representation for the next year we're going to do is take each of those eight digit representations
and join all them together and we end up with a twenty four digit of all those numbers joined together
in series then after that.
This is where we start to do the conversion process over to the base 64 world so we're gonna take that
string of twenty four digits and split them out into groups of six characters.
So we end up with four groups of six to take a look at each the binary codes here.
Each of them are six characters.
So here's the kind of conversion step we then take each of these binary strings convert them back into
normal numbers and then for each of these binary strings right here we map them to the base 60 for table
the big difference between the ascii table and the base64 one is to express the ascii table we've got
the eight individual characters but base64 gets expressed with four characters or seeming six characters
for each binary string so we take these groups of six characters and we reference each of those on that
base64 table.
So for example the 0 1 1 1 0 0.
We can look that up on this table and there we go right there 0 1 1 1 0 0.
We end up with a seed you then repeat that process for the next group of 6.
So this one is 1 1 0 1 1 0 echo v over here we can see 1 1 0 1 1 0 for the number 2 and we repeat that
process on and on.
So we end up with the letters C to capital B and J.
We then join those letters together and that is our base64 representation of the string s e c so that's
pretty much it.
That's how we're going to go from a string over to this kind of character encoding and that's how we're
going to do the actual conversion process.
Once again we don't have to do all this conversion on our own or by hand.
Instead we're going to use a simple function that is built directly into javascript to do this conversion
for us.
Like I said I thought you might be curious about how all this stuff is actually working it's now that
we've got a better idea of what's going on.
We'll take a quick pause right here and start to do this conversion in the next video.